# Choosing a Linux distribution
There are many aspects involved in selecting a Linux distribution, based on various functional requirements.

- **Platform**: The choice between a server, a desktop, or an embedded platform is probably one of the top decisions in selecting a Linux distribution. Linux server platforms and embedded systems are usually configured with the core operating system services and essential components required for specific applications (such as networking, HTTP, FTP, SSH, and email), mainly for performance and optimization considerations. On the other hand, Linux desktop workstations are loaded (or pre-loaded) with a relatively large number of software packages, including a graphical user interface for a more user-friendly experience.

- **Infrastructure**: Today we see a vast array of application and server platform deployments spanning from hardware and local (on-premises) data centers to hypervisors, containers, and cloud infrastructures. Weighing a Linux distribution against any of these types of deployments should take into consideration the resources and costs involved. For example, a multi-CPU, large-memory, and generally high-footprint Linux instance may cost more to run in the cloud or a Virtual Private Server (VPS) hosting infrastructure. Lightweight Linux distributions take fewer resources and are easier to scale in environments with containerized workloads and services (for instance, with Kubernetes and Docker). Most Linux distributions now have their cloud images available for all major public cloud providers (for instance, Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Compute Engine). Docker container images for various Linux distributions are available for download on Docker Hub (https://hub.docker.com). Some Docker images are larger (heavier) than others. For example, the Ubuntu Server Docker image outweighs the Alpine Linux Docker image considerably, and this may tip the balance when choosing one distribution over the other. Also, to address the relatively new shift to containerized workflows and services, some Linux distributions offer a streamlined or more optimized version of their operating system to support the underlying application infrastructure. 

- **Performance**: Arguably, all Linux distributions can be tweaked to high-performance benchmarks in terms of CPU, GPU, memory, and storage. Performance should be considered very closely with the platform and the application of choice. An email backend won’t perform very well on a Raspberry Pi, while a media streaming server would do just fine (with some external storage attached). The configuration effort for tuning the performance should also be taken into consideration. Rocky Linux, Debian, openSUSE, Fedora and Ubuntu all come with server and desktop versions reasonably optimized for their use. The server versions can be easily customized for a particular application or service, by only limiting the software packages to those that are essential for the application. To further boost performance, some would go to the extent of recompiling a lightweight Linux distro (for instance, Gentoo) to benefit from compiler-level optimizations in the kernel for specific subsystems (for instance, the networking stack or user permissions). As with any other criteria, choosing a Linux distribution based on some application or platform performance is a balancing act, and most of the time, common Linux distros will perform exceptionally well.

- **Security**: When considering security, we have to keep in mind that a system is only as secure as its weakest link. An insecure application or system component would put the entire system at risk. Therefore, the security of a Linux distribution should be scrutinized as it pertains to the related application and platform environment. We can talk about desktop security for a Linux distro serving as a desktop workstation, for example, with the user browsing the internet, downloading media, installing various software packages, and running different applications. The safe handling of all these operations (against malware, viruses, and intrusions) would make for a good indicator of how secure a system can be. There are Linux distros that are highly specialized in application security and isolation and are well suited for desktop use: Qubes OS, Kali Linux, Whonix, Tails, and Parrot Security OS. Some of these distributions have been developed for penetration testing and security research.

- **Reliability**: Linux distributions with aggressive release cycles and a relatively large amount of new code added in each release are usually less stable. For such distros, it’s essential to choose a stable version. Fedora, for example, has rapid releases, being one of the fastest-progressing Linux platforms. Yet, we should not heed the myths claiming that Fedora or other similar fast-evolving Linux distros, such as openSUSE Tumbleweed, are less reliable. Don’t forget, some of the most reliable Linux distributions out there, RHEL and SUSE Linux Enterprise (SLE), are derived from Fedora and openSUSE, respectively.

There’s no magic formula for deciding on a Linux distribution. In most cases, the choice of platform (be it server, desktop or IoT) combined with your own personal preferences is what determines the Linux distribution to go for. With production-grade environments, most of the previously enumerated criteria become critical, and the available options for our Linux platform of choice would be reduced to a few industry-proven solutions.